geckos don't attract much attention but
speculation as to how they stick has
mostly come from watching geckos taking
walls in their stride but the smoothest
pasture is not really smooth when viewed
close up under an electron microscope
could these tiny bumps rub against the
geckos textured soles to make a friction
hold this after all is what stops
trainers from slipping at the gym but no
one can make trainers grip upside down
some insects also have good vertical
hold this jungle nymph secretes a thin
film of fluid from a gland which makes a
tacky bond between its foot and the
glass wall
but geckos don't leave sticky footprints
which suggests that natural glue can
only work for fly weights geckos have
been taxing scientific minds ever since
Aristotle but of course they're
remarkable feet go back much further
than that maybe there are clues from
their past worldwide there are a
staggering 850 species of gecko from the
most beautifully beaded of lizards to
the tiniest the most recently discovered
is just one and a half centimetres long
the smallest lizard in the world
[Music]
although most live in tropical forests
there are grassland and desert geckos
too
they've adapted to many different walks
of life how can their under selves be so
flexible in fact not all of them Oh
their success - sticky fingers
we know from specimens trapped in amber
that sticky foot pads have been around
for at least 30 million years their most
distant relatives probably lived on the
ground like today's banded ground gecko
and therefore had little use for either
climbing claws or sticky pads
any move into tougher terrain would have
placed heavier demands on Footwear to
catch prey on rock faces geckos would
have needed grappling claws sticky feet
probably evolved to help geckos climb
and feed among the smooth maxi leaves of
tropical plants from these shiny
surfaces it would have been a relatively
short step to our walls and windows